This two-year course in physics is presented from the point of view that you,
the reader, are going to be a physicist. This is not necessarily the case of course,
but that is what every professor in every subject assumes! If you are going to
be a physicist, you will have a lot to study: two hundred years of the most rapidly
developing field of knowledge that there is. So much knowledge, in fact, that
you might think that you cannot learn all of it in four years, and truly you cannot;
you will have to go to graduate school too!
Surprisingly enough, in spite of the tremendous amount of work that has been
done for all this time it is possible to condense the enormous mass of results to
a large extent—that is, to find laws which summarize all our knowledge. Even
so, the laws are so hard to grasp that it is unfair to you to start exploring this
tremendous subject without some kind of map or outline of the relationship of
one part of the subject of science to another. Following these preliminary remarks,
the first three chapters will therefore outline the relation of physics to the rest
of the sciences, the relations of the sciences to each other, and the meaning of
science, to help us develop a "feel" for the subject.
You might ask why we cannot teach physics by just giving the basic laws on
page one and then showing how they work in all possible circumstances, as we do
in Euclidean geometry, where we state the axioms and then make all sorts of de-
ductions. (So, not satisfied to learn physics in four years, you want to learn it in
four minutes?) We cannot do it in this way for two reasons. First, we do not yet
know all the basic laws: there is an expanding frontier of ignorance. Second, the
correct statement of the laws of physics involves some very unfamiliar ideas
which require advanced mathematics for their description. Therefore, one needs
a considerable amount of preparatory training even to learn what the words
mean. No, it is not possible to do it that way. We can only do it piece by piece.
Each piece, or part, of the whole of nature is always merely an approximation
to the complete truth, or the complete truth so far as we know it. In fact, every-
thing we know is only some kind of approximation, because we know that we do
not know all the laws as yet. Therefore, things must be learned only to be unlearned
again or, more likely, to be corrected.
The principle of science, the definition, almost, is the following: The test of
all knowledge is experiment. Experiment is the sole judge of scientific "truth."
But what is the source of knowledge? Where do the laws that are to be tested
come from? Experiment, itself, helps to produce these laws, in the sense that it
gives us hints. But also needed is imagination to create from these hints the great
generalizations—to guess at the wonderful, simple, but very strange patterns be-
neath them all, and then to experiment to check again whether we have made the
right guess. This imagining process is so difficult that there is a division of labor
in physics: there are theoretical physicists who imagine, deduce, and guess at new
laws, but do not experiment; and then there are experimental physicists who ex-
periment, imagine, deduce, and guess.
We said that the laws of nature are approximate: that we first find the "wrong"
ones, and then we find the "right" ones. Now, how can an experiment be "wrong" ?
First, in a trivial way: if something is wrong with the apparatus that you did not
notice. But these things are easily fixed, and checked back and forth. So without
snatching at such minor things, how can the results of an experiment be wrong?
Only by being inaccurate. For example, the mass of an object never seems to change; a spinning top has the same weight as a still one. So a "law" was in-
vented: mass is constant, independent of speed. That "law" is now found to be
incorrect. Mass is found to increase with velocity, but appreciable increases require
velocities near that of light. A true law is: if an object moves with a speed of
less than one hundred miles a second the mass is constant to within one part in
a million. In some such approximate form this is a correct law. So in practice
one might think that the new law makes no significant difference. Well, yes and
no. For ordinary speeds we can certainly forget it and use the simple constant-
mass law as a good approximation. But for high speeds we are wrong, and the
higher the speed, the more wrong we are.
Finally, and most interesting, philosophically we are completely wrong with
the approximate law. Our entire picture of the world has to be altered even though
the mass changes only by a little bit. This is a very peculiar thing about the
philosophy, or the ideas, behind the laws. Even a very small effect sometimes
requires profound changes in our ideas.
Now, what should we teach first? Should we teach the correct but unfamiliar
law with its strange and difficult conceptual ideas, for example the theory of
relativity, four-dimensional space-time, and so on? Or should we first teach the
simple "constant-mass" law, which is only approximate, but does not involve such
difficult ideas? The first is more exciting, more wonderful, and more fun, but the
second is easier to get at first, and is a first step to a real understanding of the
second idea. This point arises again and again in teaching physics. At different
times we shall have to resolve it in different ways, but at each stage it is worth
learning what is now known, how accurate it is, how it fits into everything else,
and how it may be changed when we learn more.
Let us now proceed with our outline, or general map, of our understanding
of science today (in particular, physics, but also of other sciences on the periphery),
so that when we later concentrate on some particular point we will have some idea
of the background, why that particular point is interesting, and how it fits into
the big structure. So, what is our over-all picture of the world? 
If, in some cataclysm, all of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed, and only
one sentence passed on to the next generations of creatures, what statement would
contain the most information in the fewest words? I believe it is the atomic
hypothesis (or the atomic fact, or whatever you wish to call it) that all things are
made of atoms—little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting
each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed
into one another. In that one sentence, you will see, there is an enormous amount
of information about the world, if just a little imagination and thinking are applied.
To illustrate the power of the atomic idea, suppose that we have a drop of
water a quarter of an inch on the side. If we look at it very closely we see nothing
but water—smooth, continuous water. Even if we magnify it with the best optical
microscope available—roughly two thousand times—then the water drop will be
roughly forty feet across, about as big as a large room, and if we looked rather
closely, we would still see relatively smooth water—but here and there small
football-shaped things swimming back and forth. Very interesting. These are
paramecia. You may stop at this point and get so curious about the paramecia
with their wiggling cilia and twisting bodies that you go no further, except per-
haps to magnify the paramecia still more and see inside. This, of course, is a subject
for biology, but for the present we pass on and look still more closely at the water
material itself, magnifying it two thousand times again. Now the drop of water
extends about fifteen miles across, and if we look very closely at it we see a kind
of teeming, something which no longer has a smooth appearance—it looks some-
thing like a crowd at a football game as seen from a very great distance. In order
to see what this teeming is about, we will magnify it another two hundred and
fifty times and we will see something similar to what is shown in Fig. 1-1. This
is a picture of water magnified a billion times, but idealized in several ways.
In the first place, the particles are drawn in a simple manner with sharp edges,
which is inaccurate. Secondly, for simplicity, they are sketched almost schemati-
cally in a two-dimensional arrangement, but of course they are moving around in
three dimensions. Notice that there are two kinds of "blobs" or circles to represent
the atoms of oxygen (black) and hydrogen (white), and that each oxygen has two
hydrogens tied to it. (Each little group of an oxygen with its two hydrogens is
called a molecule.) The picture is idealized further in that the real particles in
nature are continually jiggling and bouncing, turning and twisting around one
another. You will have to imagine this as a dynamic rather than a static picture.
Another thing that cannot be illustrated in a drawing is the fact that the particles
are "stuck together"—that they attract each other, this one pulled by that one,
etc. The whole group is "glued together," so to speak. On the other hand, the
particles do not squeeze through each other. If you try to squeeze two of them too
close together, they repel.
The atoms are 1 or 2 X 10-8 cm in radius. Now 10-8 cm is called an
angstrom (just as another name), so we say they are 1 or 2 angstroms (Å) in radius.
Another way to remember their size is this: if an apple is magnified to the size
of the earth, then the atoms in the apple are approximately the size of the original
apple.
Now imagine this great drop of water with all of these jiggling particles stuck
together and tagging along with each other. The water keeps its volume; it does
not fall apart, because of the attraction of the molecules for each other. If the
drop is on a slope, where it can move from one place to another, the water will
flow, but it does not just disappear—things do not just fly apart—because of
the molecular attraction. Now the jiggling motion is what we represent as heat:
when we increase the temperature, we increase the motion. If we heat the water,
the jiggling increases and the volume between the atoms increases, and if the
heating continues there comes a time when the pull between the molecules is not
enough to hold them together and they do fly apart and become separated from
one another. Of course, this is how we manufacture steam out of water—by
increasing the temperature; the particles fly apart because of the increased motion.
In Fig. 1-2 we have a picture of steam. This picture of steam fails in one
respect: at ordinary atmospheric pressure there might be only a few molecules in
a whole room, and there certainly would not be as many as three in this figure.
Most squares this size would contain none—but we accidentally have two and a
half or three in the picture (just so it would not be completely blank). Now in
the case of steam we see the characteristic molecules more clearly than in the case
of water. For simplicity, the molecules are drawn so that there is a 120° angle
between them. In actual fact the angle is 105°3', and the distance between the
center of a hydrogen and the center of the oxygen is 0.957 Å, so we know this
molecule very well.
Let us see what some of the properties of steam vapor or any other gas are.
The molecules, being separated from one another, will bounce against the walls.
Imagine a room with a number of tennis balls (a hundred or so) bouncing around
in perpetual motion. When they bombard the wall, this pushes the wall away.
(Of course we would have to push the wall back.) This means that the gas exerts
a jittery force which our coarse senses (not being ourselves magnified a billion
times) feels only as an average push. In order to confine a gas we must apply a
pressure. Figure 1-3 shows a standard vessel for holding gases (used in all
textbooks), a cylinder with a piston in it. Now, it makes no difference what the
shapes of water molecules are, so for simplicity we shall draw them as tennis
balls or little dots. These things are in perpetual motion in all directions. So many
of them are hitting the top piston all the time that to keep it from being patiently
knocked out of the tank by this continuous banging, we shall have to hold the
piston down by a certain force, which we call the pressure (really, the pressure
times the area is the force). Clearly, the force is proportional to the area, for if
we increase the area but keep the number of molecules per cubic centimeter the
same, we increase the number of collisions with the piston in the same proportion
as the area was increased an energy barrier or "hill." Consider this analogy: If we wanted to take an object
from one place to another, at the same level but on the other side of a hill, we could
push it over the top, but to do so requires the addition of some energy. Thus
most chemical reactions do not occur, because there is what is called an activa-
tion energy in the way. In order to add an extra atom to our chemical requires
that we get it close enough that some rearrangement can occur; then it will stick.
But if we cannot give it enough energy to get it close enough, it will not go to com-
pletion, it will just go part way up the "hill" and back down again. However,
if we could literally take the molecules in our hands and push and pull the atoms
around in such a way as to open a hole to let the new atom in, and then let it snap
back, we would have found another way, around the hill, which would not require
extra energy, and the reaction would go easily. Now there actually are, in the cells,
very large molecules, much larger than the ones whose changes we have been de-
scribing, which in some complicated way hold the smaller molecules just right, so
that the reaction can occur easily. These very large and complicated things are
called enzymes. (They were first called ferments, because they were originally
discovered in the fermentation of sugar. In fact, some of the first reactions in
the cycle were discovered there.) In the presence of an enzyme the reaction will go.
An enzyme is made of another substance called protein. Enzymes are very
big and complicated, and each one is different, each being built to control a certain
special reaction. The names of the enzymes are written in Fig. 3-1 at each reaction.
(Sometimes the same enzyme may control two reactions.) We emphasize that the
enzymes themselves are not involved in the reaction directly. They do not change;
they merely let an atom go from one place to another. Having done so, the enzyme
is ready to do it to the next molecule, like a machine in a factory. Of course, there
must be a supply of certain atoms and a way of disposing of other atoms. Take
hydrogen, for example: there are enzymes which have special units on them which
carry the hydrogen for all chemical reactions. For example, there are three or four
hydrogen-reducing enzymes which are used all over our cycle in different places.
It is interesting that the machinery which liberates some hydrogen at one place
will take that hydrogen and use it somewhere else.
The most important feature of the cycle of Fig. 3-1 is the transformation
from GDP to GTP (guanadine-di-phosphate to guanadine-tri-phosphate) because
the one substance has much more energy in it than the other. Just as there is a
"box" in certain enzymes for carrying hydrogen atoms around, there are special
energy-carrying "boxes" which involve the triphosphate group. So, GTP has more
energy than GDP and if the cycle is going one way, we are producing molecules
which have extra energy and which can go drive some other cycle which requires
energy, for example the contraction of muscle. The muscle will not contract
unless there is GTP. We can take muscle fiber, put it in water, and add GTP,
and the fibers contract, changing GTP to GDP if the right enzymes are present.
So the real system is in the GDP-GTP transformation; in the dark the GTP
which has been stored up during the day is used to run the whole cycle around the
other way. An enzyme you see, does not care in which direction the reaction goes,
for if it did it would violate one of the laws of physics.
Physics is of great importance in biology and other sciences for still another
reason, that has to do with experimental techniques. In fact, if it were not for the
great development of experimental physics, these biochemistry charts would not
be known today. The reason is that the most useful tool of all for analyzing this
fantastically complex system is to label the atoms which are used in the reactions.
Thus, if we could introduce into the cycle some carbon dioxide which has a
"green mark" on it, and then measure after three seconds where the green mark
is, and again measure after ten seconds, etc., we could trace out the course of the
reactions. What are the "green marks"? They are different isotopes. We recall
that the chemical properties of atoms are determined by the number of electrons,
not by the mass of the nucleus. But there can be, for example in carbon, six
neutrons or seven neutrons, together with the six protons which all carbon nuclei
have. Chemically, the two atoms C 12 and C 13 are the same, but they differ in
weight and they have different nuclear properties, and so they are distinguishable.
3-4
By using these isotopes of different weights, or even radioactive isotopes like C 14 ,
which provide a more sensitive means for tracing very small quantities, it is pos-
sible to trace the reactions.
Now, we return to the description of enzymes and proteins. All proteins are
not enzymes, but all enzymes are proteins. There are many proteins, such as the
proteins in muscle, the structural proteins which are, for example, in cartilage and
hair, skin, etc., that are not themselves enzymes. However, proteins are a very
characteristic substance of life: first of all they make up all the enzymes, and
second, they make up much of the rest of living material. Proteins have a very
interesting and simple structure. They are a series, or chain, of different ammo
acids. There are twenty different amino acids, and they all can combine with
each other to form chains in which the backbone is CO-NH, etc. Proteins are
nothing but chains of various ones of these twenty amino acids. Each of the amino
acids probably serves some special purpose. Some, for example, have a sulphur
atom at a certain place; when two sulphur atoms are in the same protein, they
form a bond, that is, they tie the chain together at two points and form a loop.
Another has extra oxygen atoms which make it an acidic substance, another has
a basic characteristic. Some of them have big groups hanging out to one side, so -
that they take up a lot of space. One of the amino acids, called prolene, is not
really an amino acid, but imino acid. There is a slight difference, with the result
that when prolene is in the chain, there is a kink in the chain. If we wished to
manufacture a particular protein, we would give these instructions: put one of
those sulphur hooks here; next, add something to take up space; then attach some-
thing to put a kink in the chain. In this way, we will get a complicated-looking
chain, hooked together and having some complex structure; this is presumably
just the manner in which all the various enzymes are made. One of the great tri-
umphs in recent times (since 1960), was at last to discover the exact spatial atomic
arrangement of certain proteins, which involve some fifty-six or sixty amino acids
in a row. Over a thousand atoms (more nearly two thousand, if we count the
hydrogen atoms) have been located in a complex pattern in two proteins. The
first was hemoglobin. One of the sad aspects of this discovery is that we cannot see
anything from the pattern; we do not understand why it works the way it does.
Of course, that is the next problem to be attacked.
Another problem is how do the enzymes know what to be? A red-eyed fly
makes a red-eyed fly baby, and so the information for the whole pattern of enzymes
to make red pigment must be passed from one fly to the next. This is done by a
substance in the nucleus of the cell, not a protein, called DNA (short for des-
oxyribose nucleic acid). This is the key substance which is passed from one cell
to another (for instance, sperm cells consist mostly of DNA) and carries the
information as to how to make the enzymes. DNA is the "blueprint." What does
the blueprint look like and how does it work? First, the blueprint must be able
to reproduce itself. Secondly, it must be able to instruct the protein. Concerning
the reproduction, we might think that this proceeds like cell reproduction. Cells
simply grow bigger and then divide in half. Must it be thus with DNA molecules,
then, that they too grow bigger and divide in half? Every atom certainly does not
grow bigger and divide in half! No, it is impossible to reproduce a molecule
except by some more clever way.
The structure of the substance DNA was studied for a long time, first chemi-
cally to find the composition, and then with x-rays to find the pattern in space.
The result was the following remarkable discovery: The DNA molecule is a pair
of chains, twisted upon each other. The backbone of each of these chains, which
are analogous to the chains of proteins but chemically quite different, is a series
of sugar and phosphate groups, as shown in Fig. 3-2. Now we see how the chain
can contain instructions, for if we could split this chain down the middle, we would
have a series BAADC . . . and every living thing could have a different series.
Thus perhaps, in some way, the specific instructions for the manufacture of pro-
teins are contained in the specific series of the DNA.
Attached to each sugar along the line, and linking the two chains together, are
certain pairs of cross-links. However, they are not all of the same kind; there are
3-5
four kinds, called adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine, but let us call them
A, B, C, and D. The interesting thing is that only certain pairs can sit opposite
each other, for example A with B and C with D. These pairs are put on the two
chains in such a way that they "fit together," and have a strong energy of interac-
tion. However, C will not fit with A, and B will not fit with C; they will only fit
in pairs, A against B and C against D. Therefore if one is C, the other must be
D, etc. Whatever the letters may be in one chain, each one must have its specific
complementary letter on the other chain.
What then about reproduction? Suppose we split this chain in two. How
can we make another one just like it? If, in the substances of the cells, there is a
manufacturing department which brings up phosphate, sugar, and A, B, C, D
units not connected in a chain, the only ones which will attach to our split chain
will be the correct ones, the complements of BAADC . . ., namely, ABBCD ...
Thus what happens is that the chain splits down the middle during cell division,
one half ultimately to go with one cell, the other half to end up in the other cell;
when separated, a new complementary chain is made by each half-chain.
Next comes the question, precisely how does the order of the A, B, C, D units
determine the arrangement of the amino acids in the protein? This is the central
unsolved problem in biology today. The first clues, or pieces of information,
however, are these: There are in the cell tiny particles called microsomes, and
it is now known that that is the place where proteins are made. But the micro-
somes are not in the nucleus, where the DNA and its instructions are. Something
seems to be the matter. However, it is also known that little molecule pieces come
off the DNA—not as long as the big DNA molecule that carries all the informa-
tion itself, but like a small section of it. This is called RNA, but that is not essential.
It is a kind of copy of the DNA, a short copy. The RNA, which somehow carries
a message as to what kind of protein to make goes over to the microsome; that
is known. When it gets there, protein is synthesized at the microsome. That is
also known. However, the details of how the amino acids come in and are arranged
in accordance with a code that is on the RNA are, as yet, still unknown. We do
not know how to read it. If we knew, for example, the "lineup" A, B, C, C, A,
we could not tell you what protein is to be made.
Certainly no subject or field is making more progress on so many fronts at
the present moment, than biology, and if we were to name the most powerful
assumption of all, which leads one on and on in an attempt to understand life,
it is that all things are made of atoms, and that everything that living things do can
be understood in terms of the jigglings and wigglings of atoms.
3-4 Astronomy
In this rapid-fire explanation of the whole world, we must now turn to
astronomy. Astronomy is older than physics. In fact, it got physics started by
showing the beautiful simplicity of the motion of the stars and planets, the under-
standing of which was the beginning of physics. But the most remarkable discovery
in all of astronomy is that the stars are made of atoms of the same kind as those on
the earth* How was this done? Atoms liberate light which has definite fre-
* How I'm rushing through this! How much each sentence in this brief story contains.
"The stars are made of the same atoms as the earth." I usually pick one small topic like
this to give a lecture on. Poets say science takes away from the beauty of the stars—mere
globs of gas atoms. Nothing is "mere." I too can see the stars on a desert night, and
feel them. But do I see less or more ? The vastness of the heavens stretches my imagina-
tion—stuck on this carousel my little eye can catch one-million-year-old light. A vast
pattern—of which I am a part—perhaps my stuff was belched from some forgotten
star, as one is belching there. Or see them with the greater eye of Palomar, rushing all
apart from some common starting point when they were perhaps all together. What
is the pattern, or the meaning, or the why ? It does not do harm to the mystery to know
a little about it. For far more marvelous is the truth than any artists of the past imagined!
Why do the poets of the present not speak of it ? What men are poets who can speak of
Jupiter if he were like a man, but if he is an immense spinning sphere of methane and
ammonia must be silent?
3-6
quencies, something like the timbre of a musical instrument, which has definite
pitches or frequencies of sound. When we are listening to several different tones
we can tell them apart, but when we look with our eyes at a mixture of colors we
cannot tell the parts from which it was made, because the eye is nowhere near as
discerning as the ear in this connection. However, with a spectroscope we can
analyze the frequencies of the light waves and in this way we can see the very tunes
of the atoms that are in the different stars. As a matter of fact, two of the chemical
elements were discovered on a star before they were discovered on the earth.
Helium was discovered on the sun, whence its name, and technetium was dis-
covered in certain cool stars. This, of course, permits us to make headway in
understanding the stars, because they are made of the same kinds of atoms which
are on the earth. Now we know a great deal about the atoms, especially con-
cerning their behavior under conditions of high temperature but not very great
density, so that we can analyze by statistical mechanics the behavior of the stellar
substance. Even though we cannot reproduce the conditions on the earth, using
the basic physical laws we often can tell precisely, or very closely, what will happen.
So it is that physics aids astronomy. Strange as it may seem, we understand the
distribution of matter in the interior of the sun far better than we understand the
interior of the earth. What goes on inside a star is better understood than one might
guess from the difficulty of having to look at a little dot of light through a telescope,
because we can calculate what the atoms in the stars should do in most circum-
stances.
One of the most impressive discoveries was the origin of the energy of the
stars, that makes them continue to burn. One of the men who discovered this was
out with his girl friend the night after he realized that nuclear reactions must be
going on in the stars in order to make them shine. She said "Look at how pretty
the stars shine!" He said "Yes, and right now I am the only man in the world
who knows why they shine." She merely laughed at him. She was not impressed
with being out with the only man who, at that moment, knew why stars shine.
Well, it is sad to be alone, but that is the way it is in this world.
It is the nuclear "burning" of hydrogen which supplies the energy of the sun;
the hydrogen is converted into helium. Furthermore, ultimately, the manufacture
of various chemical elements proceeds in the centers of the stars, from hydrogen.
The stuff of which we are made, was "cooked" once, in a star, and spit out. How
do we know? Because there is a clue. The proportion of the different isotopes—
how much C12, how much C13, etc., is something which is never changed by
chemical reactions, because the chemical reactions are so much the same for the
two. The proportions are purely the result of nuclear reactions. By looking at the
proportions of the isotopes in the cold, dead ember which we are, we can discover
what the furnace was like in which the stuff of which we are made was formed.
That furnace was like the stars, and so it is very likely that our elements were
"made" in the stars and spit out in the explosions which we call novae and super-
novae. Astronomy is so close to physics that we shall study many astronomical
things as we go along.
3-5 Geology
We turn now to what are called earth sciences, or geology. First, meteorology
and the weather. Of course the instruments of meteorology are physical instru-
ments, and the development of experimental physics made these instruments
possible, as was explained before. However, the theory of meteorology has never
been satisfactorily worked out by the physicist. "Well," you say, "there is nothing
but air, and we know the equations of the motions of air." Yes we do. "So if
we know the condition of air today, why can't we figure out the condition of the
air tomorrow?" First, we do not really know what the condition is today, because
the air is swirling and twisting everywhere. It turns out to be very sensitive, and
even unstable. If you have ever seen water run smoothly over a dam, and then
turn into a large number of blobs and drops as it falls, you will understand what I
mean by unstable. You know the condition of the water before it goes over the
3-7
spillway; it is perfectly smooth; but the moment it begins to fall, where do the
drops begin? What determines how big the lumps are going to be and where they
will be? That is not known, because the water is unstable. Even a smooth moving
mass of air, in going over a mountain turns into complex whirlpools and eddies.
In many fields we find this situation of turbulent flow that we cannot analyze today.
Quickly we leave the subject of weather, and discuss geology!
The question basic to geology is, what makes the earth the way it is? The
most obvious processes are in front of your very eyes, the erosion processes of
the rivers, the winds, etc. It is easy enough to understand these, but for every bit
of erosion there is an equal amount of something else going on. Mountains are
no lower today, on the average, than they were in the past. There must be moun-
tsim-forming processes. You will find, if you study geology, that there are
mountain-forming processes and vulcanism, which nobody understands but which
is half of geology. The phenomenon of volcanoes is really not understood. What
makes an earthquake is, ultimately, not understood. It is understood that if
something is pushing something else, it snaps and will slide—that is all right.
But what pushes, and why? The theory is that there are currents inside the earth—
circulating currents, due to the difference in temperature inside and outside—
which, in their motion, push the surface slightly. Thus if there are two opposite
circulations next to each other, the matter will collect in the region where they
meet and make belts of mountains which are in unhappy stressed conditions, and
so produce volcanoes and earthquakes.
What about the inside of the earth? A great deal is known about the speed of
earthquake waves through the earth and the density of distribution of the earth.
However, physicists have been unable to get a good theory as to how dense a
substance should be at the pressures that would be expected at the center of the
earth. In other words, we cannot figure out the properties of matter very well in
these circumstances. We do much less well with the earth than we do with the
conditions of matter in the stars. The mathematics involved seems a little too
difficult, so far, but perhaps it will not be too long before someone realizes that
it is an important problem, and really work it out. The other aspect, of course, is
that even if we did know the density, we cannot figure out the circulating currents.
Nor can we really work out the properties of rocks at high pressure. We cannot
tell how fast the rocks should "give"; that must all be worked out by experiment.
3-6 Psychology
Next, we consider the science of psychology. Incidentally, psychoanalysis is
not a science: it is at best a medical process, and perhaps even more like witch-
doctoring. It has a theory as to what causes disease—lots of different "spirits,"
etc. The witch doctor has a theory that a disease like malaria is caused by a spirit
which comes into the air; it is not cured by shaking a snake over it, but quinine
does help malaria. So, if you are sick, I would advise that you go to the witch
doctor because he is the man in the tribe who knows the most about the disease;
on the other hand, his knowledge is not science. Psychoanalysis has not been
checked carefully by experiment, and there is no way to find a list of the number
of cases in which it works, the number of cases in which it does not work, etc.
The other branches of psychology, which involve things like the physiology
of sensation—what happens in the eye, and what happens in the brain—are, if
you wish, less interesting. But some small but real progress has been made in
studying them. One of the most interesting technical problems may or may not
be called psychology. The central problem of the mind, if you will, or the nervous
system, is this: when an animal learns something, it can do something different
than it could before, and its brain cell must have changed too, if it is made out of
atoms. In what way is it different ? We do not know where to look, or what to
look for, when something is memorized. We do not know what it means, or what
change there is in the nervous system, when a fact is learned. This is a very impor-
tant problem which has not been solved at all. Assuming, however, that there is
some kind of memory thing, the brain is such an enormous mass of interconnect-
3-8
ing wires and nerves that it probably cannot be analyzed in a straightforward
manner. There is an analog of this to computing machines and computing ele-
ments, in that they also have a lot of lines, and they have some kind of element,
analogous, perhaps, to the synapse, or connection of one nerve to another. This
is a very interesting subject which we have not the time to discuss further—the
relationship between thinking and computing machines. It must be appreciated,
of course, that this subject will tell us very little about the real complexities of
ordinary human behavior. All human beings are so different. It will be a long
time before we get there. We must start much further back. If we could even figure
out how a dog works, we would have gone pretty far. Dogs are easier to under-
stand, but nobody yet knows how dogs work.
3-7 How did it get that way?
In order for physics to be useful to other sciences in a theoretical way, other
than in the invention of instruments, the science in question must supply to the
physicist a description of the object in a physicist's language. They can say "why
does a frog jump?," and the physicist cannot answer. If they tell him what a frog
is, that there are so many molecules, there is a nerve here, etc., that is different.
If they will tell us, more or less, what the earth or the stars are like, then we can
figure it out. In order for physical theory to be of any use, we must know where
the atoms are located. In order to understand the chemistry, we must know
exactly what atoms are present, for otherwise we cannot analyze it. That is but
one limitation, of course.
There is another kind of problem in the sister sciences which does not exist
in physics; we might call it, for lack of a better term, the historical question.
How did it get that way? If we understand all about biology, we will want to
know how all the things which are on the earth got there. There is the theory of
evolution, an important part of biology. In geology, we not only want to know
how the mountains are forming, but how the entire earth was formed in the be-
ginning, the origin of the solar system, etc. That, of course, leads us to want to
know what kind of matter there was in the world. How did the stars evolve?
What were the initial conditions? That is the problem of astronomical history.
A great deal has been found out about the formation of stars, the formation of
elements from which we were made, and even a little about the origin of the
universe.
There is no historical question being studied in physics at the present time.
We do not have a question, "Here are the laws of physics, how did they get that
way?" We do not imagine, at the moment, that the laws of physics are somehow
changing with time, that they were different in the past than they are at present.
Of course they may be, and the moment we find they are, the historical question
of physics will be wrapped up with the rest of the history of the universe, and then
the physicist will be talking about the same problems as astronomers, geologists,
and biologists.
Finally, there is a physical problem that is common to many fields, that is
very old, and that has not been solved. It is not the problem of finding new funda-
mental particles, but something left over from a long time ago—over a hundred
years. Nobody in physics has really been able to analyze it mathematically
satisfactorily in spite of its importance to the sister sciences. It is the analysis of
circulating or turbulent fluids. If we watch the evolution of a star, there comes a
point where we can deduce that it is going to start convection, and thereafter we
can no longer deduce what should happen. A few million years later the star
explodes, but we cannot figure out the reason. We cannot analyze the weather.
We do not know the patterns of motions that there should be inside the earth.
The simplest form of the problem is to take a pipe that is very long and push water
through it at high speed. We ask: to push a given amount of water through that
pipe, how much pressure is needed? No one can analyze it from first principles
and the properties of water. If the water flows very slowly, or if we use a thick
goo like honey, then we can do it nicely. You will find that in your textbook.
3-9
What we really cannot do is deal with actual, wet water running through a pipe.
That is the central problem which we ought to solve some day, and we have not.
A poet once said, "The whole universe is in a glass of wine." We will probably
never know in what sense he meant that, for poets do not write to be understood.
But it is true that if we look at a glass of wine closely enough we see the entire
universe. There are the things of physics: the twisting liquid which evaporates
depending on the wind and weather, the reflections in the glass, and our imagi-
nation adds the atoms. The glass is a distillation of the earth's rocks, and in its
composition we see the secrets of the universe's age, and the evolution of stars.
What strange array of chemicals are in the wine? How did they come to be?
There are the ferments, the enzymes, the substrates, and the products. There in
wine is found the great generalization: all life is fermentation. Nobody can
discover the chemistry of wine without discovering, as did Louis Pasteur, the cause
of much disease. How vivid is the claret, pressing its existence into the conscious-
ness that watches it! If our small minds, for some convenience, divide this glass
of wine, this universe, into parts—physics, biology, geology, astronomy, psy-
chology, and so on—remember that nature does not know it! So let us put it all
back together, not forgetting ultimately what it is for. Let it give us one more final
pleasure: drink it and forget it all!
3-10
4
Conservation of Energy
4-1 What is energy?
In this chapter, we begin our more detailed study of the different aspects of
physics, having finished our description of things in general. To illustrate the ideas
and the kind of reasoning that might be used in theoretical physics, we shall now
examine one of the most basic laws of physics, the conservation of energy.
There is a fact, or if you wish, a law, governing all natural phenomena that
are known to date. There is no known exception to this law—it is exact so far as
we know. The law is called the conservation of energy. It states that there is a
certain quantity, which we call energy, that does not change in the manifold
changes which nature undergoes. That is a most abstract idea, because it is a
mathematical principle; it says that there is a numerical quantity which does not
change when something happens. It is not a description of a mechanism, or any-
thing concrete; it is just a strange fact that we can calculate some number and when
we finish watching nature go through her tricks and calculate the number again,
it is the same. (Something like the bishop on a red square, and after a number of
moves—details unknown—it is still on some red square. It is a law of this nature.)
Since it is an abstract idea, we shall illustrate the meaning of it by an analogy.
Imagine a child, perhaps "Dennis the Menace," who has blocks which are
absolutely indestructible, and cannot be divided into pieces. Each is the same as
the other. Let us suppose that he has 28 blocks. His mother puts him with his
28 blocks into a room at the beginning of the day. At the end of the day, being
curious, she counts the blocks very carefully, and discovers a phenomenal law—
no matter what he does with the blocks, there are always 28 remaining! This
continues for a number of days, until one day there are only 27 blocks, but a little
investigating shows that there is one under the rug—she must look everywhere
to be sure that the number of blocks has not changed. One day, however, the
number appears to change—there are only 26 blocks. Careful investigation in-
dicates that the window was open, and upon looking outside, the other two blocks
are found. Another day, careful count indicates that there are 30 blocks! This
causes considerable consternation, until it is realized that Bruce came to visit,
bringing his blocks with him, and he left a few at Dennis' house. After she has
disposed of the extra blocks, she closes the window, does not let Bruce in, and then
everything is going along all right, until one time she counts and finds only 25
blocks. However, there is a box in the room, a toy box, and the mother goes to
open the toy box, but the boy says "No, do not open my toy box," and screams.
Mother is not allowed to open the toy box. Being extremely curious, and somewhat
ingenious, she invents a scheme! She knows that a block weighs three ounces,
so she weighs the box at a time when she sees 28 blocks, and it weighs 16 ounces.
The next time she wishes to check, she weighs the box again, subtracts sixteen
ounces and divides by three. She discovers the following:


on. In an arbitrary time interval t there are t/T "half-lives," and the fraction left
after this time t is ^')tlT.
If we knew that a piece of material, say a piece of wood, had contained an
amount A of radioactive material when it was formed, and we found out by a direct
measurement that it now contains the amount B, we could compute the age of
the object, t, by solving the equation
There are, fortunately, cases in which we can know the amount of radioactivity
that was in an object when it was formed. We know, for example, that the carbon
dioxide in the air contains a certain small fraction of the radioactive carbon
isotope C 14 (replenished continuously by the action of cosmic rays). If we measure
the total carbon content of an object, we know that a certain fraction of that amount
was originally the radioactive C 14 ; we know, therefore, the starting amount A
to use in the formula above. Carbon-14 has a half-life of 5000 years. By careful
measurements we can measure the amount left after 20 half-lives or so and can
therefore "date" organic objects which grew as long as 100,000 years ago.
We would like to know, and we think we do know, the life of still older things.
Much of our knowledge is based on the measurements of other radioactive iso-
topes which have different half-lives. If we make measurements with an isotope
with a longer half-life, then we are able to measure longer times. Uranium, for
example, has an isotope whose half-life is about 109 years, so that if some material
was formed with uranium in it 109 years ago, only half the uranium would remain
today. When the uranium disintegrates, it changes into lead. Consider a piece
of rock which was formed a long time ago in some chemical process. Lead, being
of a chemical nature different from uranium, would appear in one part of the rock
and uranium would appear in another part of the rock. The uranium and lead
5-4
would be separate. If we look at that piece of rock today, where there should only
be uranium we will how find a certain fraction of uranium and a certain fraction
of lead. By comparing these fractions, we can tell what percent of the uranium
disappeared and changed into lead. By this method, the age of certain rocks has
been determined to be several billion years. An extension of this method, not
using particular rocks but looking at the uranium and lead in the oceans and using
averages over the earth, has been used to determine (within the past few years)
that the age of the earth itself is approximately 5.5 billion years.
It is encouraging that the age of the earth is found to be the same as the age
of the meteorites which land on the earth, as determined by the uranium method.
It appears that the earth was formed out of rocks floating in space, and that the
meteorites are, quite likely, some of that material left over. At some time more than
five billion years ago, the universe started. It is now believed that at least our part
of the universe had its beginning about ten or twelve billion years ago. We do
not know what happened before then. In fact, we may well ask again: Does the
question make any sense? Does an earlier time have any meaning?
5-5 Units and standards of time
We have implied that it is convenient if we start with some standard unit of
time, say a day or a second, and refer all other times to some multiple or fraction
of this unit. What shall we take as our basic standard of time? Shall we take the
human pulse? If we compare pulses, we find that they seem to vary a lot. On
comparing two clocks, one finds they do not vary so much. You might then say,
well, let us take a clock. But whose clock? There is a story of a Swiss boy who
wanted all of the clocks in his town to ring noon at the same time. So he went
around trying to convince everyone of the value of this. Everyone thought it was
a marvelous idea so long as all of the other clocks rang noon when his did! It is
rather difficult to decide whose clock we should take as a standard. Fortunately,
we all share one clock—the earth. For a long time the rotational period of the
earth has been taken as the basic standard of time. As measurements have been
made more and more precise, however, it has been found that the rotation of the
earth is not exactly periodic, when measured in terms of the best clocks. These
"best" clocks are those which we have reason to believe are accurate because they
agree with each other. We now believe that, for various reasons, some days are
longer than others, some days are shorter, and on the average the period of the
earth becomes a little longer as the centuries pass.
Until very recently we had found nothing much better than the earth's
period, so all clocks have been related to the length of the day, and the second
has been defined as 1/86400 of an average day. Recently we have been gaining
experience with some natural oscillators which we now believe would provide a
more constant time reference than the earth, and which are also based on a natural
phenomenon available to everyone. These are the so-called "atomic clocks."
Their basic internal period is that of an atomic vibration which is very insensitive
to the temperature or any other external effects. These clocks keep time to an
accuracy of one part in 109 or better. Within the past two years an improved
atomic clock which operates on the vibration of the hydrogen atom has been de-
signed and built by Professor Norman Ramsey at Harvard University. He believes
that this clock might be 100 times more accurate still. Measurements now in
progress will show whether this is true or not.
We may expect that since it has been possible to build clocks much more
accurate than astronomical time, there will soon be an agreement among scientists
to define the unit of time in terms of one of the atomic clock standards.
5-6 Large distances
Let us now turn to the question of distance. How far, or how big, are things?
Everybody knows that the way you measure distance is to start with a stick and
count. Or start with a thumb and count. You begin with a unit and count. How
5-5
Fig. 5-4. The height of a Sputnik is
determined by triangulation
Fig. 5-5. The distance of nearby
stars can be measured by triangulation,
using the diameter of the earth's orbit as
a baseline.
does one measure smaller things? How does one subdivide distance? In the same
way that we subdivided time: we take a smaller unit and count the number of
such units it takes to make up the longer unit. So we can measure smaller and
smaller lengths.
But we do not always mean by distance what one gets by counting off with a
meter stick. It would be difficult to measure the horizontal distance between two
mountain tops using only a meter stick. We have found by experience that dis-
tance can be measured in another fashion: by triangulation. Although this means
that we are really using a different definition of distance, when they can both be
used they agree with each other. Space is more or less what Euclid thought it
was, so the two types of definitions of distance agree. Since they do agree on the
earth it gives us some confidence in using triangulation for still larger distances.
For example, we were able to use triangulation to measure the height of the first
Sputnik. We found that it was roughly 5 X 105 meters high. By more careful
measurements the distance to the moon can be measured in the same way. Two
telescopes at different places on the earth can give us the two angles we need.
It has been found in this way that the moon is 4 X 108 meters away.
We cannot do the same with the sun, or at least no one has been able to yet.
The accuracy with which one can focus on a given point on the sun and with which
one can measure angles is not good enough to permit us to measure the distance
to the sun. Then how can we measure the distance to the sun? We must invent
an extension of the idea of triangulation. We measure the relative distances of
all the planets by astronomical observations of where the planets appear to be,
and we get a picture of the solar system with the proper relative distances of every-
thing, but with no absolute distance. One absolute measurement is then required,
which has been obtained in a number of ways. One of the ways, which was believed
until recently to be the most accurate, was to measure the distance from the earth
to Eros, one of the small planetoids which passes near the earth every now and then.
By triangulation on this little object, one could get the one required scale measure-
ment. Knowing the relative distances of the rest, we can then tell the distance, for
example, from the earth to the sun, or from the earth to Pluto.
Within the past year there has been a big improvement in our knowledge of
the scale of the solar system. At the Jet Propulsion Laboratory the distance from
the earth to Venus was measured quite accurately by a direct radar observation.
This, of course, is a still different type of inferred distance. We say we know
the speed at which light travels (and therefore, at which radar waves travel),
and we assume that it is the same speed everywhere between the earth and Venus.
We send the radio wave out, and count the time until the reflected wave comes
back. From the time we infer a distance, assuming we know the speed. We have
really another definition of a measurement of distance.
How do we measure the distance to a star, which is much farther away?
Fortunately, we can go back to our triangulation method, because the earth moving
around the sun gives us a large baseline for measurements of objects outside the
solar system. If we focus a telescope on a star in summer and in winter, we might
hope to determine these two angles accurately enough to be able to measure the
distance to a star.
What if the stars are too far away for us to use triangulation? Astronomers
are always inventing new ways of measuring distance. They find, for example,
that they can estimate the size and brightness of a star by its color. The color
and brightness of many nearby stars—whose distances are known by triangula-
tion—have been measured, and it is found that there is a smooth relationship
between the color and the intrinsic brightness of stars (in most cases). If one now
measures the color of a distant star, one may use the color-brightness relationship
to determine the intrinsic brightness of the star. By measuring how bright the star
appears to us at the earth (or perhaps we should say how dim it appears), we can
compute how far away it is. (For a given intrinsic brightness, the apparent bright-
ness decreases with the square of the distance.) A nice confirmation of the correct-
ness of this method of measuring stellar distances is given by the results obtained
for groups of stars known as globular clusters. A photograph of such a group is
5-6
Fig. 5-6. A cluster of stars near the center of our galaxy. Their distance from the
earth is 30,000 light-years, or about 3 X 1 0 2 0 meters.
shown in Fig. 5-6. Just from looking at the photograph one is convinced that these
stars are all together. The same result is obtained from distance measurements
by the color-brightness method.
A study of many globular clusters gives another important bit of informa-
tion. It is found that there is a high concentration of such clusters in a certain
part of the sky and that most of them are about the same distance from us. Cou-
pling this information with other evidence, we conclude that this concentration of
clusters marks the center of our galaxy. We then know the distance to the center
of the galaxy—about 10 20 meters.
Knowing the size of our own galaxy, we have a key to the measurement of
still larger distances—the distances to other galaxies. Figure 5-7 is a photograph
of a galaxy, which has much the same shape as our own. Probably it is the same
size, too. (Other evidence supports the idea that galaxies are all about the same
size.) If it is the same size as ours, we can tell its distance. We measure the angle
it subtends in the sky; we know its diameter, and we compute its distance—
triangulation again!
Fig. 5-7. A spiral galaxy like our own. Presuming that its diameter is similar to
that of our own galaxy, we may compute its distance from its apparent size. It is 30
million light-years (3 X 1 0 2 3 meters) from the earth.
5-7
Fig. 5-8. The most distant object, 3C295 in BOOTES (indicated by the arrow),
measured by the 200-inch telescope to date (1960).
Photographs of exceedingly distant galaxies have recently been obtained with
the giant Palomar telescope. One is shown in Fig. 5-8. It is now believed that
some of these galaxies are about halfway to the limit of the universe—1026 meters
away—the largest distance we can contemplate!
5-7 Short distances
Now let's think about smaller distances. Subdividing the meter is easy. With-
out much difficulty we can mark off one thousand equal spaces which add up to
one meter. With somewhat more difficulty, but in a similar way (using a good
microscope), we can mark off a thousand equal subdivisions of the millimeter to
make a scale of microns (millionths of a meter). It is difficult to continue to smaller
scales, because we cannot "see" objects smaller than the wavelength of visible
light (about 5 X 10~7 meter).
We need not stop, however, at what we can see. With an electron microscope,
we can continue the process by making photographs on a still smaller scale, say
down to 10~8 meter (Fig. 5-9). By indirect measurements—by a kind oftriangula-
tion on a microscopic scale— we can continue to measure to smaller and smaller
scales. First, from an observation of the way light of short wavelength (x-radiation)
is reflected from a pattern of marks of known separation, we determine the wave-
Fig. 5-9. Electron micrograph of some virus molecules. The "large" sphere is for
calibration and is known to have a diameter of 2 X 10~ 7 meter (2000 A).
5-8
DISTANCES
LIGHT-YEARS METERS
length of the light vibrations. Then, from the pattern of the scattering of the same
light from a crystal, we can determine the relative location of the atoms in the
crystal, obtaining results which agree with the atomic spacings also determined
by chemical means. We find in this way that atoms have a diameter of about
10-10 meter.
There is a large "gap" in physical sizes between the typical atomic dimension
of about lO"10 meter and the nuclear dimensions 10~15 meter, 10~5 times smaller.
For nuclear sizes, a different way of measuring size becomes convenient. We meas-
ure the apparent area, σ, called the effective cross section. If we wish the radius,
we can obtain it from σ == rr 2, since nuclei are nearly spherical.
Measurement of a nuclear cross section can be made by passing a beam of
high-energy particles through a thin slab of material and observing the number
of particles which do not get through. These high-energy particles will plow right
through the thin cloud of electrons and will be stopped or deflected only if they
hit the concentrated weight of a nucleus. Suppose we have a piece of material
1 centimeter thick. There will be about 108 atomic layers. But the nuclei are so
small that there is little chance that any nucleus will lie behind another. We might
imagine that a highly magnified view of the situation—looking along the particle
beam—would look like Fig. 5-10.
The chance that a very small particle will hit a nucleus on the trip through
is just the total area covered by the profiles of the nuclei divided by the total
area in the picture. Suppose that we know that in an area A of our slab of material
there are N atoms (each with one nucleus, of course). Then the total area "covered"
by the nuclei is N σ / A . Now let the number of particles of our beam which arrive
at the slab be n\ and the number which come out the other side be n^. The frac-
tion which do not get through is (n1 — n^/n^, which should just equal the
5-9
Fig. 5-10. Imagined view through a
block of carbon 1 cm thick if only the
nuclei were observed.
fraction of the area covered. We can obtain the radius of the nucleus from the
equation*
From such an experiment we find that the radii of the nuclei are from about 1 to 6
times 10~15 meter. The length unit lO"15 meter is called fhe fermi, in honor of
Enrico Fermi (1901-1958).
What do we find if we go to smaller distances? Can we measure smaller
distances ? Such questions are not yet answerable. It has been suggested that the
still unsolved mystery of nuclear forces may be unravelled only by some modifica-
tion of our idea of space, or measurement, at such small distances.
It might be thought that it would be a good idea to use some natural length
as our unit of length—say the radius of the earth or some fraction of it. The
meter was originally intended to be such a unit and was defined to be (π/2) X 10~7
times the earth's radius. It is neither convenient nor very accurate to determine
the unit of length in this way. For a long time it has been agreed internationally
that the meter would be defined as the distance between two scratches on a bar
kept in a special laboratory in France. More recently, it has been realized that
this definition is neither as precise as would be useful, nor as permanent or universal
as one would like. It is currently being considered that a new definition be adopted,
an agreed-upon (arbitrary) number of wavelengths of a chosen spectral line.
Measurements of distance and of time give results which depend on the ob-
server. Two observers moving with respect to each other will not measure the same
distances and times when measuring what appear to be the same things. Distances
and time intervals have different magnitudes, depending on the coordinate system
(or "frame of reference") used for making the measurements. We shall study this
subject in more detail in a later chapter.
Perfectly precise measurements of distances or times are not permitted by the
laws of nature. We have mentioned earlier that the errors in a measurement of
the position of an object must be at least as large as
where h is a small quantity called "Planck's constant" and ∆p is the error in
our knowledge of the momentum (mass times velocity) of the object whose posi-
tion we are measuring. It was also mentioned that the uncertainty in position
measurements is related to the wave nature of particles.
The relativity of space and time implies that time measurements have also a
minimum error, given in fact by
where AE is the error in our knowledge of the energy of the process whose time
period we are measuring. If we wish to know more precisely when something
happened we must know less about what happened, because our knowledge of
the energy involved will be less. The time uncertainty is also related to the wave
nature of matter.
* This equation is right only if the area covered by the nuclei is a small fraction of the
total, i.e., if (MI — ni)ln\ is much less than 1. Otherwise we must make a correction
for the fact that some nuclei will be partly obscured by the nuclei in front of them.

